doc/step_format.md, before:

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**  *generated with [DocToc](https://github.com/thlorenz/doctoc)*

- [step options](#step-options)
- [Input files (`input:`)](#input-files-input)
- [Input options](#input-options)
  - [Passing input files all at once (default)](#passing-input-files-all-at-once-default)
  - [Passing files of allowed type (option `filetype`)](#passing-files-of-allowed-type-option-filetype)
  - [Passing files in groups (option `group_by`)](#passing-files-in-groups-option-group_by)
  - [Attaching variables to input filenames (option `labels`)](#attaching-variables-to-input-filenames-option-labels)
  - [Looping through values of a SoS variable (Option `for_each` and `nc_for_each`)](#looping-through-values-of-a-sos-variable-option-for_each-and-nc_for_each)
  - [Conditional skip of a step (option `skip`)](#conditional-skip-of-a-step-option-skip)
- [Dependent files (`depends` (or called `dependent`?))](#dependent-files-depends-or-called-dependent)
- [Pre-input, pre-action and post-action variables](#pre-input-pre-action-and-post-action-variables)
- [step actions](#step-actions)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

Although only a *step action* is required for a SoS step, a complete SoS step can have the following form

```
[name_step: option1, option2, ...]
#
# description of the step
#
key0=value0

input:
    input files, opt1=value1, opt2=value2

depends:
    dependent files

key1=value1
key2=value2

step_action

key3=value3
key4=value4

```

### step options

**Step options** are specified after step name and controls how the step will be executed. SoS provides the following options

* `skip`: the whole step will be skipped as if it is not defined at all in the script. This option provides a quick method to disable a step.
* `no_input`: this step does not need any input so it is a **root** of the execution tree. This option disconnects the current step with its previous steps so that it can be
    executed before the completion of previous steps. 
* `terminal`: this step is one of the **terminals** or **leafs** of the execution tree. This allows the later steps to be
   executed before the completion of this step. The step can have output but no other step should depend on these output
   files.
* `blocking`: the step can only be executed by one instance of SoS. All other SoS instances will wait until one instance complete this step. This option should be used for actions such as the creation of index and downloading of resources.

### Input files (`input:`)

The input of SoS step follows the following rules:

1. **the input of a SoS step is by default the output of the previous step**.
3. **step option `no_input` specifies that no input file is needed for the current step**
4. **Input of a step can be specified by item `input`**, which should be a list or tupe of either 
    filenames (quoted strings) or SoS variables (use names of variables).  Wildcard characters
	(`*` and `?`) are always expanded. 

Examples of input specification are as follows:

```
input:
	'file1.fasta', 'file2.fasta'

input:
    'file*.fasta', 'filename with space.fasta'
    
input:
    'file*.txt',
    'directory/file2.txt'
   
input:
    aligned_reads

input:
    aligned_reads, reference_genome

input:
    aligned_reads[2:]

```

It does not matter if `aligned_reads` and `reference_genome` are lists of filenames. SoS will expand wildcard characters and
flatten the lists to a single list of filenames.


### Input options 

The input options of a SoS step control how input files are passed to the step action. To should be keyword arguments appended to list
of input files.

#### Passing input files all at once (default)

This is the default action for a SoS step. That is to say, action in the following step will get all 
`input_files` as its input (variable `input`) to step action.

```
[step]
input:
    input_files

run('echo ${input}')

```

#### Passing files of allowed type (option `filetype`)

Emission options are appended to input file list as comma separated lists. A python parameter syntax is required.

Option `filetype` accepts one or more filetypes (file extension with `.`) or a lambda function. For example,

```
[step]
input:
	input_files, filetype='.fastq'
	
```

passes only files with extension `.fastq`.


```
[step]
input:
	input_files,
	filetype=['.fastq', '.fastq.gz']
	
```

passes only files with extension `.fastq` or `.fastq.gz`.



```
[step]
input:
	input_files,
	filetype=lambda x: open(x).readline().startswith('##fileformat=VCF4.1')
	
```

passes only files with the first line starting with string `##fileformat=VCF4.1``. Here the value of the parameter is a lambda function that will be passed to each input filename.


#### Passing files in groups (option `group_by`)

Option `group_by` pass input files in groups. For example,

```
[step]
input:
	'file1', 'file2', 'file3', 'file4',
	group_by='single'

run('echo ${input}')

```

will execute `run('echo ${input}')` four times, with `input` set to `['file1']`, `['file2']`, `['file3']` and `['file4']` respectively.

Other values of `group_by` includes

* `'pairwise'`: yields two groups `['file1', 'file2']`, `['file2', 'file3']`, and `['file3', 'file4']`.
* `'combinations'`: yields six groups `['file1', 'file2']`, `['file1', 'file3']`,  `['file1', 'file4']`, `['file2', 'file3']`, `['file2', 'file4']` and `['file3', 'file4']`.
* ``pairs``: yields `['file1', 'file3']` and `['file2', 'file4']`. It basically split the input files in half and match files in the first half with files in the second half.

for four input files. Obviously, the output of the `pairs` cases depends on the order of files. If you need to pair files in any particular order, you can control it in input. For example

```
[step]
input:
	sorted([x for x in fastq_files if '_R1_' in x]),
	sorted([x for x in fastq_files if '_R2_' in x]),
	group_by='pairs'

run('echo ${input}')

```

will take all input files and sort them by `_R1_` and `_R2_` and by filename. For example, four files
`FEB_R1_1.txt FEB_R2_2.txt FEB_R1_2.txt FEB_R2_1.txt` will be sorted as
`FEB_R1_1.txt FEB_R1_2.txt FEB_R2_1.txt FEB_R2_2.txt` and be sent to step
action in two groups `['FEB_R1_1.txt', 'FEB_R2_1.txt']` and `['FEB_R1_2.txt', 'FEB_R2_2.txt']`.

#### Attaching variables to input filenames (option `labels`)

There are cases where the command line options or output directories depends on input filename. SoS allows you to label each filename with one or more variables so that they can be used accordingly. For example, if you have input files `bam_files` with values

```python
bam_files = ['case/A1.bam', 'case/A2.bam', 'ctrl/A1.bam', 'ctrl/A2.bam']
```

You might want to define some derived variables such as

```python
mutated = [x.split('/')[0] for x in bam_files]
sample_name = [os.path.basename(x).split('.')[0] for x in bam_files]
```

with values

```python
mutated = ['case', 'case', 'ctrl', 'ctrl']
sample_name = ['A1', 'A2', 'A1', 'A2']
```

Then, if you are processing these files individually, or in pairs, you can attach values of these derived variables as follows:


```
[step]
input:
	bam_files,
	group_by='pairs', labels=['mutated', 'sample_name']

run('process ${input} with variables ${_mutated} and ${_sample_name}')

```

Here `bam_files` will be passed in pairs with file labels set to variables with `_` prefixed to their names. More specifically,

* Group1: `input = ['case/A1.bam', 'ctrl/A1.bam']`, `_mutated=['case', 'ctrl']`, `_sample_name=['A1', 'A1']`
* Group2: `input = ['case/A2.bam', 'ctrl/A2.bam']`, `_mutated=['case', 'ctrl']`, `_sample_name=['A2', 'A2']`

This is equivalent to

```
[step]
input:
	bam_files,
	group_by='pairs'

_mutated = [x.split('/')[0] for x in input]
_sample_name = [os.path.basename(x).split('.')[0] for x in input]

run('process ${input} with variables ${_mutated} and ${_sample_name}')

```

but it is cleaner because you do not have to do this each time when `bam_files` is used.

#### Looping through values of a SoS variable (Option `for_each` and `nc_for_each`)

Option `for_each` allows you to repeat step actions for each value of a variable. For example, if

```python
method=['method1', 'method2']
```

You can repeat the analysis with each method using

```
[step]
input:
	bam_files,
	for_each='method'

run('Analyze ${input} with method ${_method}')

```

The step action will be executed twice with value of parameter `_method` set to `'method1'` and `'method2'` respectively.

Nested loops are also allowed. For example, if

```python
method=['method1', 'method2']
parameters=['-5', '-9']
```

You can execute 

```
[step]
input:
	bam_files,
	for_each=['method', 'parameter']

run('Analyze ${input} with method ${_method} and parameter ${_parameter}')

```

with parameters

* `_methods='method1', _parameter='-5'`
* `_methods='method1', _parameter='-9'`
* `_methods='method2', _parameter='-5'`
* `_methods='method2', _parameter='-9'`

If you would like to loop the action with several parameters, you can put them into a the same level using

```
[step]
input:
	bam_files,
	for_each='method,parameter'

run('Analyze ${input} with method ${_method} and parameter ${_parameter}')

```

The action will then be executed twice with parameters

* `_methods='method1', _parameter='-5'`
* `_methods='method2', _parameter='-9'`

Finally, option `for_each` assumes that the steps can be executed independently and concurrently and will
try to execute the actions in parallel if the script is executed in parallel mode (option `-j`). If for some
reason this assumption is wrong and the step needs to be executed sequentially, you should use the
`nc_for_each` option, which stands for `non-concurrent for_each`.


#### Conditional skip of a step (option `skip`)

Option `skip=True` will make SoS skip the execution of the current step. Using `skip=True` is not very useful so this option is often used with a SoS variable. For example

```python
[10]
input:
	fasta_files,
	skip=len(fasta_failes) == 1
	
run('command to merge multiple fasta files.')
```

Here the `skip` option gets the value of `True` if there is only one input file. The command to merge multiple input files would then be skipped.

One important detail of this option is that the step is actually **executed with a null action** that passes input files to output files
so this step still yields its `step_output`. In comparison, a step is completely ignored if it has step option `skip`. The consequence
of this rule for this particular example is that its next step would get a merged file if there are multiple input files, or
the original file if there is only a single input file.

### Dependent files (`depends` (or called `dependent`?))

This item specifies files that are required for the step. Although not required, it is a good practice to list resource files and other dependency files for a particular step. For example

```python
[10]
input:
	fasta_files
	
depends:
	reference_seq
```

### Pre-input, pre-action and post-action variables

* Pre-input variables are defined before `input:` and evaluated before filenames are parsed.

* Pre-action variables are defined between `input:` and step action and evaluated (probably repeatedly) before the executation of 
  step action.

* Post-action variables are defined after step action and are evaluated after the completion of all step actions.

Please refer to [use of SoS variables](variables.md) for details

### step actions

Please refer to [step actions](actions.md) for details

Commit message:

Stop using nc_for_each, use nonconcurrent section option

doc/step_format.md, after:

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**  *generated with [DocToc](https://github.com/thlorenz/doctoc)*

- [step options](#step-options)
- [Input files (`input:`)](#input-files-input)
- [Input options](#input-options)
  - [Passing input files all at once (default)](#passing-input-files-all-at-once-default)
  - [Passing files of allowed type (option `filetype`)](#passing-files-of-allowed-type-option-filetype)
  - [Passing files in groups (option `group_by`)](#passing-files-in-groups-option-group_by)
  - [Attaching variables to input filenames (option `labels`)](#attaching-variables-to-input-filenames-option-labels)
  - [Looping through values of a SoS variable (Option `for_each`)](#looping-through-values-of-a-sos-variable-option-for_each)
  - [Conditional skip of a step (option `skip`)](#conditional-skip-of-a-step-option-skip)
- [Dependent files (`depends` (or called `dependent`?))](#dependent-files-depends-or-called-dependent)
- [Pre-input, pre-action and post-action variables](#pre-input-pre-action-and-post-action-variables)
- [step actions](#step-actions)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

Although only a *step action* is required for a SoS step, a complete SoS step can have the following form

```
[name_step: option1, option2, ...]
#
# description of the step
#
key0=value0

input:
    input files, opt1=value1, opt2=value2

depends:
    dependent files

key1=value1
key2=value2

step_action

key3=value3
key4=value4

```

### step options

**Step options** are specified after step name and controls how the step will be executed. SoS provides the following options

* `skip`: the whole step will be skipped as if it is not defined at all in the script. This option provides a quick method to disable a step.
* `no_input`: this step does not need any input so it is a **root** of the execution tree. This option disconnects the current step with its previous steps so that it can be
    executed before the completion of previous steps. 
* `terminal`: this step is one of the **terminals** or **leafs** of the execution tree. This allows the later steps to be
   executed before the completion of this step. The step can have output but no other step should depend on these output
   files.
* `nonconcurrent`: if the step action will be repeated (using input options `group_by` or `for_each`), the loop actions are assumed to be parallel executable.
  If for some reason this assumption is wrong, you can set option `nonconcurrent` to let the actions execute sequentially.  
* `blocking`: the step can only be executed by one instance of SoS. All other SoS instances will wait until one instance complete this step. This option should be used for actions such as the creation of index and downloading of resources.

### Input files (`input:`)

The input of SoS step follows the following rules:

1. **the input of a SoS step is by default the output of the previous step**.
3. **step option `no_input` specifies that no input file is needed for the current step**
4. **Input of a step can be specified by item `input`**, which should be a list or tupe of either 
    filenames (quoted strings) or SoS variables (use names of variables).  Wildcard characters
	(`*` and `?`) are always expanded. 

Examples of input specification are as follows:

```
input:
	'file1.fasta', 'file2.fasta'

input:
    'file*.fasta', 'filename with space.fasta'
    
input:
    'file*.txt',
    'directory/file2.txt'
   
input:
    aligned_reads

input:
    aligned_reads, reference_genome

input:
    aligned_reads[2:]

```

It does not matter if `aligned_reads` and `reference_genome` are lists of filenames. SoS will expand wildcard characters and
flatten the lists to a single list of filenames.


### Input options 

The input options of a SoS step control how input files are passed to the step action. To should be keyword arguments appended to list
of input files.

#### Passing input files all at once (default)

This is the default action for a SoS step. That is to say, action in the following step will get all 
`input_files` as its input (variable `input`) to step action.

```
[step]
input:
    input_files

run('echo ${input}')

```

#### Passing files of allowed type (option `filetype`)

Emission options are appended to input file list as comma separated lists. A python parameter syntax is required.

Option `filetype` accepts one or more filetypes (file extension with `.`) or a lambda function. For example,

```
[step]
input:
	input_files, filetype='.fastq'
	
```

passes only files with extension `.fastq`.


```
[step]
input:
	input_files,
	filetype=['.fastq', '.fastq.gz']
	
```

passes only files with extension `.fastq` or `.fastq.gz`.



```
[step]
input:
	input_files,
	filetype=lambda x: open(x).readline().startswith('##fileformat=VCF4.1')
	
```

passes only files with the first line starting with string `##fileformat=VCF4.1``. Here the value of the parameter is a lambda function that will be passed to each input filename.


#### Passing files in groups (option `group_by`)

Option `group_by` pass input files in groups. For example,

```
[step]
input:
	'file1', 'file2', 'file3', 'file4',
	group_by='single'

run('echo ${input}')

```

will execute `run('echo ${input}')` four times, with `input` set to `['file1']`, `['file2']`, `['file3']` and `['file4']` respectively.

Other values of `group_by` includes

* `'pairwise'`: yields two groups `['file1', 'file2']`, `['file2', 'file3']`, and `['file3', 'file4']`.
* `'combinations'`: yields six groups `['file1', 'file2']`, `['file1', 'file3']`,  `['file1', 'file4']`, `['file2', 'file3']`, `['file2', 'file4']` and `['file3', 'file4']`.
* ``pairs``: yields `['file1', 'file3']` and `['file2', 'file4']`. It basically split the input files in half and match files in the first half with files in the second half.

for four input files. Obviously, the output of the `pairs` cases depends on the order of files. If you need to pair files in any particular order, you can control it in input. For example

```
[step]
input:
	sorted([x for x in fastq_files if '_R1_' in x]),
	sorted([x for x in fastq_files if '_R2_' in x]),
	group_by='pairs'

run('echo ${input}')

```

will take all input files and sort them by `_R1_` and `_R2_` and by filename. For example, four files
`FEB_R1_1.txt FEB_R2_2.txt FEB_R1_2.txt FEB_R2_1.txt` will be sorted as
`FEB_R1_1.txt FEB_R1_2.txt FEB_R2_1.txt FEB_R2_2.txt` and be sent to step
action in two groups `['FEB_R1_1.txt', 'FEB_R2_1.txt']` and `['FEB_R1_2.txt', 'FEB_R2_2.txt']`.

#### Attaching variables to input filenames (option `labels`)

There are cases where the command line options or output directories depends on input filename. SoS allows you to label each filename with one or more variables so that they can be used accordingly. For example, if you have input files `bam_files` with values

```python
bam_files = ['case/A1.bam', 'case/A2.bam', 'ctrl/A1.bam', 'ctrl/A2.bam']
```

You might want to define some derived variables such as

```python
mutated = [x.split('/')[0] for x in bam_files]
sample_name = [os.path.basename(x).split('.')[0] for x in bam_files]
```

with values

```python
mutated = ['case', 'case', 'ctrl', 'ctrl']
sample_name = ['A1', 'A2', 'A1', 'A2']
```

Then, if you are processing these files individually, or in pairs, you can attach values of these derived variables as follows:


```
[step]
input:
	bam_files,
	group_by='pairs', labels=['mutated', 'sample_name']

run('process ${input} with variables ${_mutated} and ${_sample_name}')

```

Here `bam_files` will be passed in pairs with file labels set to variables with `_` prefixed to their names. More specifically,

* Group1: `input = ['case/A1.bam', 'ctrl/A1.bam']`, `_mutated=['case', 'ctrl']`, `_sample_name=['A1', 'A1']`
* Group2: `input = ['case/A2.bam', 'ctrl/A2.bam']`, `_mutated=['case', 'ctrl']`, `_sample_name=['A2', 'A2']`

This is equivalent to

```
[step]
input:
	bam_files,
	group_by='pairs'

_mutated = [x.split('/')[0] for x in input]
_sample_name = [os.path.basename(x).split('.')[0] for x in input]

run('process ${input} with variables ${_mutated} and ${_sample_name}')

```

but it is cleaner because you do not have to do this each time when `bam_files` is used.

#### Looping through values of a SoS variable (Option `for_each`)

Option `for_each` allows you to repeat step actions for each value of a variable. For example, if

```python
method=['method1', 'method2']
```

You can repeat the analysis with each method using

```
[step]
input:
	bam_files,
	for_each='method'

run('Analyze ${input} with method ${_method}')

```

The step action will be executed twice with value of parameter `_method` set to `'method1'` and `'method2'` respectively.

Nested loops are also allowed. For example, if

```python
method=['method1', 'method2']
parameters=['-5', '-9']
```

You can execute 

```
[step]
input:
	bam_files,
	for_each=['method', 'parameter']

run('Analyze ${input} with method ${_method} and parameter ${_parameter}')

```

with parameters

* `_methods='method1', _parameter='-5'`
* `_methods='method1', _parameter='-9'`
* `_methods='method2', _parameter='-5'`
* `_methods='method2', _parameter='-9'`

If you would like to loop the action with several parameters, you can put them into a the same level using

```
[step]
input:
	bam_files,
	for_each='method,parameter'

run('Analyze ${input} with method ${_method} and parameter ${_parameter}')

```

The action will then be executed twice with parameters

* `_methods='method1', _parameter='-5'`
* `_methods='method2', _parameter='-9'`

Finally, option `for_each` assumes that the steps can be executed independently and concurrently and will
try to execute the actions in parallel if the script is executed in parallel mode (option `-j`). If for some
reason this assumption is wrong and the step needs to be executed sequentially, you should use the
`nonconcurrent` section option to execute loop actions sequentially.


#### Conditional skip of a step (option `skip`)

Option `skip=True` will make SoS skip the execution of the current step. Using `skip=True` is not very useful so this option is often used with a SoS variable. For example

```python
[10]
input:
	fasta_files,
	skip=len(fasta_failes) == 1
	
run('command to merge multiple fasta files.')
```

Here the `skip` option gets the value of `True` if there is only one input file. The command to merge multiple input files would then be skipped.

One important detail of this option is that the step is actually **executed with a null action** that passes input files to output files
so this step still yields its `step_output`. In comparison, a step is completely ignored if it has step option `skip`. The consequence
of this rule for this particular example is that its next step would get a merged file if there are multiple input files, or
the original file if there is only a single input file.

### Dependent files (`depends` (or called `dependent`?))

This item specifies files that are required for the step. Although not required, it is a good practice to list resource files and other dependency files for a particular step. For example

```python
[10]
input:
	fasta_files
	
depends:
	reference_seq
```

### Pre-input, pre-action and post-action variables

* Pre-input variables are defined before `input:` and evaluated before filenames are parsed.

* Pre-action variables are defined between `input:` and step action and evaluated (probably repeatedly) before the executation of 
  step action.

* Post-action variables are defined after step action and are evaluated after the completion of all step actions.

Please refer to [use of SoS variables](variables.md) for details

### step actions

Please refer to [step actions](actions.md) for details
